User guide updates for attestation (#687)
validmind/documentation: site/guide/attestation/working-with-attestations.qmd

---
title: "Working with attestations"
date: last-modified
listing:
  - id: attestation-listing
    type: grid
    max-description-length: 250
    sort: false
    fields: [title, description]
    contents:
      - set-up-attestations.qmd
      - complete-attestation-questionnaires.qmd
      - review-attestation-questionnaires.qmd
---

Attestation enables model owners and validators to formally certify, review, and sign off on model attributes at specific points in time, supporting compliance and governance processes. 

::: {.attn}

## Prerequisites

- [x] {{< var link.login >}}
- [x] Models registered in the inventory require attestation.[^1]
- [x] If applicable, model findings have been documented.[^2]
- [x] You are assigned a role with sufficient permissions to perform attestation tasks:[^3]
   - [{{< fa hand >}} Customer Admin]{.bubble} — Sets up attestations
   - [Model owner]{.bubble} — Completes attestation questionnaires
   - [{{< fa circle-check >}} Validator]{.bubble}  — Reviews and signs off on attestation questionnaires

:::

> ## Key concepts

Reviewer: In other parts of the site where we are defining glossary terms and NOT the UI, we do not capitalise the term so let's keep that convention here.

Refer to: [Glossary](https://docs.validmind.ai/about/glossary/glossary.html), [Working with model findings — Key concepts](https://docs.validmind.ai/guide/model-validation/working-with-model-findings.html)

{{< include /about/glossary/_attestation.qmd >}}

### How does the attestation process work?

> Attestation on the {{< var validmind.product >}} begins at the start of the attestation period after the process has been set up initially. The platform captures a snapshot of each model and its findings, preserving the state at that point in time. Changes made after the process starts do not affect the historical record.

Reviewer: Pretty sure this should just be the "ValidMind Platform" variable and NOT the full "AI risk platform" variable as all of the attestation work is tracked in the platform and none of it is accessible via the library.

> Attestation on the {{< var validmind.product >}} begins at the start of the attestation period after the process has been set up initially. The platform captures a snapshot of each model and its findings, preserving the state at that point in time. Changes made after the process starts do not affect the historical record.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attestation on the {{< var validmind.platform >}} begins at the start of the attestation period after the process has been set up initially. The platform captures a snapshot of each model and its findings, preserving the state at that point in time. Changes made after the process starts do not affect the historical record.
```

Author: Applied suggestion manually before I saw this comment — thank you all the same!

Model owners and validators each see a banner on their dashboard when an attestation requires action. The banner links directly to their active respective attestation tasks, also known as _attestation instances_:

![Dashboard prompt for attestations](attestation-banner.png){width="80%" fig-alt="Attestation prompt with a link to the attestation labelled 'Open Attestations'" .screenshot}

The process tracks progress from questionnaire assignment to final sign-off. Responsibilities are shared — the model owner completes the questionnaire and the validator reviews, requests changes if needed, and signs off:

> ::: {.tc}

Reviewer: Ohhhhh this light CSS is nice! I infer it automatically applies to other places that have Mermaid charts?

Author: Yes, the CSS applies generally. I'm glad you agree — mermaid diagrams are an inexpensive way to add some visuals but the styling always really bugged me.

```{mermaid}
graph LR
    subgraph Model Owner
        A["**Not Started**"] --> B["**In Progress**"]
        B --> C["**Ready for Review**"]
    end
    
    subgraph Validator
        C --> D["**Reviewed**"]
        D --> E["**Signed Off**"]
        D -.-> B
    end
```

[The attestation process — Model owner and validator responsibilities]{.silver .small}
:::

::: {.column-margin .callout title="Attestation is collaborative"}
A validator can request changes from the model owner by rejecting the attestation questionnaire. 

___

The platform maintains a history of all status changes and notes.
:::

> **Model owners** are responsible for moving the questionnaire through these states:

Reviewer: Let's use the role bubbles here as well I think, to keep things consistent on the page — there's also a lot of bolding here that could be broken up.

Author: Technically, there is no bubble for model owners in the UI ... I snuck one in for the prerequisites only for consistency. 

The bubbles are a UI concept and it feels extraneous to repeat them in this section — there's already some visual clutter due to bolding. Let me experiment with simplifying the bolding but I'll leave this comment open for now.

Reviewer: Can we use the `.smallcaps` instead perhaps? The rolet tiles in the UI are actually displayed that way!

Author: I tried `.smallcaps` and for this to work well, you'd also need to apply this formatting to the Mermaid diagram, but it doesn't support Quarto formatting directives. 

Less is more here — I think plain text fine.

- **In Progress** — While the model owner completes the questionnaire or addresses change requests
- **Ready for Review** — When the model owner has submitted the completed questionnaire

**Validators** are responsible for moving the questionnaire through these states:

- **Reviewed** — When a validator has reviewed the questionnaire
- **Signed Off** — Final state after a validator has signed off

## How do I create meaningful attestation questionnaires?

Attestation questionnaires are typically used in model risk management to confirm that key controls, governance processes and documentation requirements have been followed throughout a model's lifecycle. These questionnaires are part of a broader effort to ensure accountability and regulatory compliance. 

Areas typically covered in the questionnaire:

- **Verification of responsibilities** — Attests that model owners, developers and validators have performed their roles in accordance with internal policies and procedures.

- **Documentation of compliance** — Confirms that required documentation — such as model documentation, validation reports and change logs — has been completed and properly archived.

> - **Evidence of control operation** — Serves as formal evidence that key controls (e.g. backtesting, performance monitoring, version control) are in place and functioning as intended.

Reviewer: A very smart human (I believe his name was NIk...) once told me that latin initialisms were opaque, and we should instead use the more accessible common name instead. ;)

Author: Very true, and I am guilty here. Fixed!

> - **Evidence of control operation** — Serves as formal evidence that key controls (e.g. backtesting, performance monitoring, version control) are in place and functioning as intended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Evidence of control operation** — Serves as formal evidence that key controls (for example: backtesting, performance monitoring, version control) are in place and functioning as intended.
```

Reviewer: @nrichers I don't see this committed — were you working on it? Seems like some comments weren't addressed yet (GitHub DOES like to hide them...)
